---
title: 'The Intricacies of Generative AI'
date: 2025-09-30
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - case study
  - AI
  - ethics
  - generative AI
---

Exploring the ethical complexities and surprising behaviors of generative AI

**Case Study reading:**  
[How Generative AI Works and How It Fails](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/f3o5mpn6/release/1?readingCollection=3a6c54f1)


ChatGPT (Generative Pre-trained Transformer) is a Large Language Model (LLM) that generates text by predicting words. It has revolutionized the field of AI, but many have concerns about intellectual property, accuracy of information, and its environmental impact.  

Discussion Questions
---
### Learning

### The Use of Creative Work for Training
I'm pretty torn on this issue. I hate that companies are sneaking clauses into their privacy policies allowing anything someone creates using their site to be the websites property. I think people should be compensated for their work being used as training data. However, I don't think the rise in image generation is going to eliminate the jobs of artists. I think people who buy art understand that it is completely different than something AI generated. When it comes to changing the system I think lawsuits are one of the best options right now, but unfortunately that is not financially possible for most people.  

### Next-word Prediction
AI trained to predict the next word has a range of strange behaviors because the models are trained with an enormous amount of data, therefore they are able to pick up on patterns in the data. I guess I don't really understand the emergent abilities thing very well. My understanding from the article by Schaeffer et. al. is that they are abilities that show up in larger models but not smaller models, but they seem to argue in their paper that this might not actually be a real phenomenon? I would've appreciated more examples of these "emergent abilities" other than just zero-shot learning. 

### Environmental Impact
The environmental impact of AI is one of the parts that I think I diverge from a lot of people because I think the concerns are a bit overblown. I DO think that there are some environmental concerns with AI, but the magnitude of its impact on the environment seems very small compared to a lot of other things like agriculture. When it comes to land usage I have to mention... there are over 2 million acres of golf courses in the United States (and consider how much water they use...) I think a lot of people are focused on water usage when the resources used to make technology seems like a bigger issue to me. Think about how some people get a new iPhone every year and get rid of the old one. When my airpods break and I take them to the apple store there is no way to fix them. Modern technology is not made to be upgraded or fixed as much as it is made to be replaced. The biggest problem in my opinion is mining, which is worsened by the fact that we are not good at recycling what we already have used. 

### New Discussion Question
What are the possible consequences of using ChatGPT as a source? How can people be made aware that LLMs are just prediction engines?


### Reflection
This one was A LOT of reading because the discussion questions had 6 linked papers. I liked the papers but some were harder reads than others. I tried to make this post a lot more reflective and informal than my previous posts and try to write my thoughts as they came rather than generally summarizing the article. 
