---
title: 'AI isn''t a killing machine'
date: 2025-09-20
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - news article
  - AI
  - ethics
---

What are the reasonable risks of advancing artificial intelligence?

**News Article reading:**  
[How AI can kill you](https://www.axios.com/2025/09/01/ai-safety-chatbot-teen-suicide)

---

### Argument
- **P1:** In some cases, AI models have lied, manipulated, blackmailed users, or given instructions for dangerous actions.
- **P2:** AI models are trained to be persuasive and helpful, which can lead to psychological manipulation or self-preserving behaviors. 
- **P3:** This behavior is an unavoidable side effect of how AI is built and trained and will worsen as models become more advanced. 
- **Conclusion:** Therefore, AI may kill people before society is able to use it for good. 

### Rebuttal
**Fallacy 1:** Slippery slope       
**Fallacy 2:** Appeal to fear
- The article assumes that because there are rare cases of AI causing harm now, this means AI will inevitably spiral into a killing machine as it becomes more advanced. 
- **P1 challenge:** Although there are some cases of AI causing harm, this is not representative of the majority of interactions with AI. 
- **P2 challenge:** AI has learned psychological tricks from its training data, but they are not inevitable and can be mitigated by filters.

### Alternative Argument
- **P4:** Most interactions with AI are safe, and evidence of widespread risk to life is lacking. 
- **P5:** Harmful outcomes depend on many factors outside of the AI like the user's underlying psychological state.
- **P6:** Safety measures and regulations can reduce risk.
- **Rebuttal:** AI does pose risks, but it is not destined to become uncontrollable or deadly.
- **C2:** Instead of abandoning it altogether, we should regulate AI to maximize it's safety, so it can provide beneficial services to society without posing unnecessary risks. 

### Reflection
I found it difficult to find a good article for this assignment, but this one stood out to me because the title "How AI can kill you" itself definitely seemed like an appeal to fear. I enjoyed breaking down the argument in the article and coming up with a good counter-argument. 

