---
title: 'Technology in Mental Health Care'
date: 2025-10-07
permalink: /posts/2025/10/blog-post-5/
tags:
  - ethics
  - podcast
  - therapy
  - mental health
---

Technology is making care more accessible - but also changing what it means

**Podcast:**  
[Databite 159: Doing the Work: Therapeutic Labor, Teletherapy, Platformization of Mental Health Care](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kQRSAGiNZeY&list=PLYrf5LyVCF1Nk28nRu8lcCIxtAH3iVGDj&index=5)

I watched the **Databites Podcast #159**, titled: *Doing the Work: Therapeutic Labor, Teletherapy, Platformization of Mental Health Care*. This podcast is about how technology is impacting therapy and mental health care, especially since the COVID-19 pandemic. The dramatic shift over to telehealth ensured both the safety of patients and providers during the pandemic, but also raised questions about   

It features experts from several different fields:
- **Linda Michaels** is a psychologist with her own private practice and the cofounder and chair of the Psychotherapy Action Network, which gives her firsthand experience as a provider navigating the difficulties raised by telehealth. 
- **Mei Kwong** works for the Center for Connected Health Policy, an organization that fields questions from both patients and governmental agencies. 
- **Melody Li** is the founder of Inclusive Therapists and an activist focused on marginalized communities and decolonizing health care.  

Since the Public Health Emergency (PHE) for COVID-19 ended in May of 2023, regulators, providers and patients are left questioning the future of teletherapy. The pandemic loosened regulations surrounding the scope of care that could be provided virtually. Virtual care was the only option for a period of time, so patients became accustomed to having Zoom calls with their therapist from home. 

There are several reasons patients might want to continue doing telehealth in a post-PHE world:
- Physical acessibility (can see a provider geographically far away)
- Emotionally safer (some patients are intimidated by in person care)
- Convenience (no travel time)

In many ways telehealth is not the same as in person care. For example, when you're on a zoom call you aren't actually making eye contact with someone, even if it feels like it. Additionally, when you go to a therapist in person they provide the space for your appointment. For successful teletherapy, you need private space and access to technology and internet. This disproportionately impacts marginalized communities. 


## Platformization
Since everyone was adapting to the pandemic and there weren't telehealth structures in place, many providers turned to platforms like Zoom or Facetime. However, pretty soon companies popped up with dedicated platforms for telehealth. If you watch enough YouTube, you'll definitely hear ads for BetterHelp. I've heard so many ads for them I could almost recite them. 

Providers join these platforms because they are promised less administrative load, and patients are promised they will be matched with a provider that is a good fit for them. These platforms treat therapy like a subscription rather than a relationship. Providers who join them are often faced with low pay and lack of autonomy, while patients are unaware their personal information is being harvested. 

What you may not know about BetterHelp is they have agreed to pay $7.8 million to settle charges brought forth by the FTC over selling users data. They promised to keep user data private, but sold emails, IP addresses, and answers to health questions to several different social media companies for advertising. 

## So What
Linda Michaels says "You always have to wonder, when something is free what does it really cost you?"

I think that is a central question to keep in mind when interacting with ANY technology. There are so many instances of tech companies prioritizing profit over privacy. It's something I've always felt wary of when it comes to social media. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, all have many employees that they have to pay (and CEOs that they want to pay even more.) Yes, they get some money from showing us ads. How do they know what to show us? Our data, everything we like, post, view, etc. is information on our likes, dislikes, wants, and needs. 

That is why I'm not surprised that BetterHelp was selling data to social media companies, even our mental health has become a commodity. I think we need to be aware of all the contexts that our data is being harvested and sold by tech companies, both in the healthcare environment and outside of it. 

### My Question
How can tech companies be more patient centered? Linda pointed out that most tech companies are run by software developers and business people, not healthcare providers, so they miss a lot of issues providers would notice. Should providers be included in the conversation with regulators, companies, or both?


